[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> I'm Barbara Marx Hubbard.
Welcome to "Our
Crisis Is a Birth."
It's hard to realize in
evolution that crisis is always
an evolutionary driver.
Before something new happens,
the system almost totally
breaks down, and
that breakthrough
is a signal that it's allowing
something new to break through.
So what we're
discovering right now
is we are facing one of
the greatest crisis we've
ever faced, because
we can see it could,
with climate change
and mass extinction,
go down to true devolution.
But if you have
evolutionary eyes,
notice that things are
breaking through all over.
And that in one small
instant of time,
if we say yes to what
breaking through,
we would find ourselves at
the next stage of evolution.
Recently, we have been
able to get a bird's eye
view on the whole
evolutionary story.
So there's the Big
Bang, and there's
the quarks and the
electrons and the protons.
And then here is the trajectory
that we have discovered.
Nature has formed single cells.
And out of those
single cells, nature
has formed
multicellular organisms.
And out of those
multicellular organisms
have come animals and
creatures of all kinds.
And out of that has come
early humans of many kinds,
and out of that has come
Homo sapien sapiens.
Do you suppose that we're
all that nature can do
and that it ends here with us?
The answer is it's not
ending here with us.
Something new is
being born through us
that we're going
to be discovering
and in the same direction
as evolution has been going.
That is to say, evolution goes
toward greater consciousness--
single cells to
multi-cells to animal--
it goes to greater freedom,
as each more complex system is
freer than the one
that comes before,
and it goes to more complex
and loving connectivity.
As for example, a
multi-cell and a human
and then a planetary
human is more
complex than the single cell.
So what we learn from this story
is the trajectory of evolution.
And as we start projecting
ourselves beyond Homo sapien
sapiens, we can
imagine that we are
being able to have more
consciousness, more
freedom of choice,
and more complex
and loving order
with each other.
And the beauty of that
is it's desirable,
because almost all
of us would choose
more consciousness, more
freedom, and more love
than not.
So as we begin to
learn this story
and feel the crisis that
could break us down,
instead of being
depressed and distressed,
we say, oh, what's
breaking through in me,
in you, in us,
and in the planet?
And then we find it.
Well, we're having such
an obvious breakdown now.
Let's say climate change
is a serious breakdown.
Species extinction is
another terrible breakdown.
And both of them could
destroy all of life,
so they're not superficial.
But it is also true, as the
environment is breaking down,
also, we're learning
how to heal it.
We're learning how
to transform it.
to preserve it.
And environments always are
breaking down, but what's good
now is that we're able to
preserve, protect, and actually
create new sources
of environment
through our tremendous
capabilities
in greenhouses and in
actual plantings and caring.
We have had five mass
extinctions, it is said,
before we got here,
and that has been
from looking at the
evolutionary record they've
been able to discover this.
And one interesting
point from this
is nature is not interested
in protecting species.
Nature seems to be interested
in protecting purpose.
And since the purpose has been
for more consciousness, more
freedom, and more
complex order, out
of those five mass extinctions
in all the creatures
that have died, there has
been continued a progression
toward more consciousness,
more freedom, and more order.
So here we are
Homo sapien sapiens
at the possible sixth
mass extinction that
could lead to the
destruction of all of life
on this Earth,
caused in part by us.
But at the same time,
if you know this story,
that nature uses
mass extinctions
to create more consciousness,
more freedom, and more complex
order for some
13.7 billion years,
then you say, what
is there in me
and us that could
be more conscious,
that could offer more
freedom, and that
is yearning for more
complex order and love?
And we're going to find it.
For example, it's obvious that
we have more consciousness
now than we ever did before.
We have the internet.
We have a continual--
we have our cell phones.
We have a continuous
connection on a global scale
never had before.
Our production
systems are linked.
Our communication
Our environmental
systems are linked.
We are all integrating.
Nature is doing it, again,
and now we notice that.
So that's one of the things
is that we have recognized
that our crisis is proceeding
into a direction of more
connectivity.
There's no doubt
that we're freer.
I mean, I think,
I'm 88 years old,
and I'm amazingly free for 88.
And part of it has to do
with health and part of it
has to do with purpose.
And part of it has to do with
simply longevity is increasing.
And if you're
looking really ahead,
you'll hear that longevity
will increase radically.
And there are some
people who are
in their 30s who say,
well, we may not really
have to die on time at
all, because they're
discovering more.
And that goes for
longevity, that
goes for health, that
goes for consciousness.
It's an enormous
blossoming of capabilities.
So in the sixth mass
extinction, the first species
to know it could
make itself extinct
can be the first species
to know it can self-evolve.
And what we're doing here in
the evolution of evolution
is saying, how can we
choose to use this crisis
as a driver for more
consciousness, more
freedom, more loving
order, more consciousness?
And we will find we can do it
So we're the very
first species that
could say, yes, I'm going
to move toward evolution.
And if you do that
in your own life,
you're going to begin to
feel you have more desire
for more love, more
freedom, and more order,
and you can say yes to it.
And you can put yourself in
your species, in your colleagues
and say together, we have
greater consciousness, freedom,
and order than we've
ever had, and you
become what I call an agent
for conscious evolution.
And this is a most
important type,
because while people are
complaining and afraid
and in fear, you're the
one who's saying, look,
we've been through this before.
Now we know how to do it, and
we have these capabilities.
And when we connect
them, we're going
to discover we have the
capacity for more life, more
freedom, and more order.
And in a traditional
spiritual sense,
you know what you can
say is evolution is good.
It's not kind, but it's good
if you like more consciousness,
more freedom, and more order.
And so I want to
say that it seems
to be indicating
to every one of us
that there's more that we can
be and that what we would like
in our deepest heart
of hearts is also
the direction of evolution.
You could say it's the direction
of spirit, source, impulse
of evolution inside you.
So when you're
feeling your concern
and I'm not sure
that I can make it,
if you just turn your attention
to that impulse and say,
yes, there is more.
I know I have more love.
I know I have more creativity.
I know I have more freedom.
You'll always be right.
You're never wrong if
you say that to yourself.
And guess what?
That part of you that
is available for that
will turn on, and you will
find yourself ever evolving.
This is such a
beautiful diagram,
because it shows you
graphically the direction
and purpose of evolution
for 13.7 billion years.
At the origin, you see
the Big Bang, the Mystery.
Nobody knows really
what happened.
Out of no thing at all comes
everything, potentially,
that is.
And then as it starts moving
beyond the original protons
and electrons and
quarks and so forth,
you will see that out of
this Big Bang, the universe
as we know it was formed.
Now, this universe has
billions of galaxies
with trillions of solar
systems and planetary systems
comparable to our own.
So we're really a creature being
born into a huge and awesome
unknown still.
And then you see the
direction of evolution.
It's Earth, life,
animal life, human life,
and what I like to do is put
an impulse inside the turns
on the spiral and that
impulse is the life purpose,
is the impulse of creation.
It's the direction of evolution.
It's the source, spirit, God,
however you wish to see it,
and the most exciting
thing is it's in you.
It's your desire for more
life, more creativity,
and when you say
yes to it, you're
saying yes to an
awesome power that's
your power if you notice it.
Now, we go up into our
turn on the spiral,
and if you let it
go up, you go right
to the heart of the
hub of the wheel
there and feel yourself
feeling the love
of that innate capacity for
your own heart's desire.
Feel that as the
place inside you
that wants more, loves
more, creates more,
and you know what's helping you?
The entire impulse of evolution.
All that's required is your yes.
And if you find other people
inside that core of the spiral
there at the heart, and you
will discover genius code,
and we'll talk about that later.
But in this overview,
you will discover
that you have far more genius
than you know and your genius
won't be awakened without your
heart's desire being turned on,
which is really nice.
And then there is
the whole thing
called planetary DNA, which
we'll talk about later, where
you will put the projects
that come out of you to create
a better world.
And you imagine that to be the
structure of the new society
beyond capitalism,
communism, socialism,
or mutually assured
destruction, which
has been a mode of
operation, which we've
had to protect each other.
If you assume it to be
made up of what you create
and of what people like you
create, coming from people's
heart's desire, turning
on our genius code,
I can clearly envision that
we're creating a new society.
And if enough of us say yes to
it, there's nothing to stop us.
Why?
Because it's the
direction of evolution
to go to higher consciousness,
freedom, and order.
And what I realized when I
discovered that in my own life
was a tremendous willingness to
affirm my deepest motivations
instead of saying
that's too much.
I remember my brother
said to me, what, Barbara?
You think you could have
an effect on evolution?
He thought I was crazy.
But in fact, I am evolution.
You are evolution.
Evolution becomes
conscious in you and me.
This is awesome.
When you say yes to the
impulse of evolution within you
that coincides with that spiral
of evolution going through all,
you become one with the
universal process itself.
In traditional language it's
like becoming one with God.
And I've always personally felt
that that impulse inside me
was spiritual, was
awesomely beautiful,
and it is what goes
through everything
and it definitely does
not stop with you and me.
Teilhard de Chardin was a
Catholic Jesuit paleontologist
never published by the
church in his lifetime.
And he was the one that
literally turned me
on to evolution when I read his
book "The Phenomenon of Man."
And here's what he said.
He discovered the
direction of evolution,
as we have mentioned,
that it appears
to go to more consciousness,
greater freedom of choice,
like a single cell to
multi-cell to animal,
and greater complexity
and connectivity or love,
and he saw that when that
happens at any scale,
there would be what he
called the Christification
of the Earth.
There would be a planetary
awakening in love.
There would be a tremendous
arousal for planet Earth.
And the minute I read that,
I thought, that's my purpose.
Now, I was about 33 years
old, with five children,
living in Connecticut
a little bit depressed.
[LAUGHS]
And I suddenly
realized, first of all,
the direction that evolution has
been going in-- consciousness,
freedom, and order--
happens to be the
way I want to go.
Now, this is very
important, because that
means every one of us has within
us the impulse toward greater
consciousness, freedom, and
order, and as any human being,
is probably more than
you think you can do.
However, it isn't, because
that in you that's doing it,
all it needs is your yes.
You're not making it up.
You didn't make up
your own intelligence.
your own capacities,
but you do have the freedom
of saying yes or no.
And the more yeses that you
can engender, as we shall see,
you're going to become a human.
And you're going
to become something
that has only existed in
the vision of the greatest
people in the past.
If you look around
in the world today,
you don't see most leaders
feeling that they know
what to do about the crises.
Do you see the
presidents, do you
see the public
officials say, I know
what to do but about
this evolutionary crisis?
They don't, in
general, even know
it's an evolutionary crisis.
They think it's a problem, and
they're trying to solve it.
And it looks like
it's not even going
to be possible to be solved,
and there's a lot of pessimism
out there.
Because if you don't
know that evolution
uses crises to go to higher
order of creativity and love,
if you don't know
that, it's very hard
to imagine that you can
stop population explosion
and climate change
problems and species
extinction all by yourself.
It looks like a trend
toward destruction.
If you don't see the trend
toward evolution, which
is more people, think
of the Millennials,
more consciousness, more
free, more creative,
with the internet
making us into a living
system, if you
don't notice that,
that is evolution at work.
If you don't notice that
we can now extend life.
We can deal with our health.
We can go into our spacecraft.
We can contact other life by
ourselves becoming other life.
If you don't notice the positive
aspects of your evolution,
you will be unnecessarily
depressed and not
only unnecessarily
depressed, but you
will act without the possibility
of your own evolution.
And that's true of
many people now.
So one very important
point of the story
of the evolution of evolution
is to know you are evolution.
What I realize is
that evolution works
towards greater consciousness,
more freedom, more
complex order, that the
consciousness inside me
and you is actually
evolution itself.
And whatever the intelligence,
on the interior of evolution
from quarks and electrons
and protons and no thing
at all, to you and I having
this enormous ability,
how do you think that happened?
Well, you could say God
is intelligent and did it
from the outside.
But if we say it's the
impulse of evolution
from within life itself, and you
are obviously from within life
itself--
I changed from depression,
serious depression,
into the awareness that I am
capable of conscious evolution
and that I have the desire to
go in the direction evolution's
going in.
So it's not like against
the natural tendency
toward devolution.
And I have to say
in my mid '30s,
I became a different person.
It was only in the 1960s
that some radio astronomers,
somewhat by accident, discovered
the earliest frequencies
of the Big Bang, what's
called the Big Bang,
and that itself is a mystery.
And they did not know that
the universe had been,
was now, and is always evolving.
Einstein thought it
was eternal universe.
Well, this is the
biggest story never told.
We thought, the
churches thought,
the schools, the
universities thought,
the entire library of
human evolution, nobody
realized that the entire
universe is evolving.
I realized this is probably
the most awesome news
that the entire human species
has had in modern history,
that the universe has
been and is now evolving.
And what that means is
that we, ourselves, are
part of an evolving universe.
It means that the direction
of evolution inside
you and me is the
direction of billions
of years of intelligence.
And far from being unintelligent
and not knowing what to do,
when we say yes, we
find that we know more.
We just have to take--
we have to be
encouraged to take more,
and that's the
evolution of evolution.
And it's just to note, this
is not told in the churches.
It is not told in
the universities.
I don't think there's one major
public leader in the world that
is operating out of this story.
They don't know it,
because it's that new,
and the traditional
universities don't teach it.
And when I found out about
it, I was absolutely thrilled.
And I thought, well, wait
till I go to Bryn Mawr College
and find out how to
evolve more consciously.
And as you will see later,
I went to Bryn Mawr.
They say, what class
do you want to take,
and what job do you
want to have later?
I said, well, I
don't want that yet.
I want to know which
direction we're evolving in
and where's my vocation?
In the big universities,
that's not the question.
It's not even asked.
I remember I was with Eleanor
Dulles and the head of Bryn
Mawr University, which
was Sargent Shriver, very
illustrious.
And I somehow got in that board
meeting, and I said somewhat--
and Buckminster Fuller
was scholar in residence.
So I was a little bit encouraged
by Buckminster Fuller,
a lot encouraged.
And I said, I think we need a
whole new course at Bryn Mawr.
And Eleanor Dulles
got up on her back.
What do you mean a new course?
I said it has to do with
the evolution of evolution
from the billions of years of
the past in the direction going
somewhere.
And Eleanor Dulles said
to me, I beg your pardon.
We have history.
I said, no, this is not history.
This is emergent reality.
And so I realized at Bryn Mawr,
I just sat in my room and read.
Now when I met one
person who got it,
his name was Dr. Jonas Salk.
And Jonas Salk
called me up one day,
and he invited me for lunch,
because I had written something
that he liked.
And the minute I saw him,
something happened in me.
And he began to tell me--
I told him everything
that was wrong with me.
I thought there was more coming.
I had more to do.
I had five children,
but nonetheless, I
was just beginning, and there
was something more happening.
And I looked pretty
much neurotic.
[LAUGHS]
And he said, Barbara, no.
You are a mutant.
You combine the characteristics
needed by evolution now.
Of course, he's the great
biologist Dr. Jonas Salk.
And the minute he
said that to me, I
realized that all these things
that seemed wrong with me
actually were the impulse of
evolution that had no name.
And at that time, there
was no understanding of it.
So with that, being
a mutant, then I
realized I'm not the only
one, but a lot of us who
had that sense of greater
possibility, greater freedom,
greater order were
considered, at that time
in the '60s and '70s, we
became the protesters.
We became the black
power leaders.
We became the importance
of the women's movement.
All of that was
important, but instead
of joining those particular
vital movements, instead of--
I became-- I joined the
evolutionary movement.
Instead of being a protester
or even women's first,
I became a woman
who was a mutant.
And I believe we'll
see as this story goes
on that more and
more of the women who
had to fight for those
rights in those days but--
we're here now.
This is 20, 30 years later.
The women are highly evolving
humans and so are the men.
We are new humans.
We're coming into
a new humanity.
One of the best analogies
of this is birth.
I'm a mother of
five, and I remember
when I was being led
into the delivery room
with one of my babies,
I said to the nurse,
if I did not know I was giving
birth, I'd think I was dying.
In other words, it's painful.
And what we we learn
in physical birth,
that the pain is
essential for the birth.
And in fact, when you're
an expectant mother
and you get a pain, it's a pain.
Hey, I'm going to the hospital.
I went there early a
few times, because I
was so excited at the pain.
Now, let's put it to
the planetary birth
of a planetary organism.
The pain is serious.
And in general, it's not
interpreted by hardly anybody
as giving birth to the next
stage of human culture.
But when you do, you respond
very differently to the pain,
because you say, what's
breaking through?
And then what you do is you look
at that wheel of co-creation,
and you see health,
education, economics, science,
and technology.
And as we will discuss
later on, you simply
go, what's breaking
through in every sector
of the wheel of
co-creation, which
is our turn on the spiral?
And when you connect
that which is
creative in every
sector of the wheel,
you actually see the new
world being born in our midst.
So when we saw the
five mass extinctions
and know that we ourselves
are at the threshold
of the sixth mass
extinction and yet,
we see the direction
of evolution
toward more consciousness,
more freedom, more order, what
we have to say is that
nature extincts species
but nature preserves purpose.
And she will get rid of millions
of species but out of it,
for all these billions
of years of breakdowns,
has come more and more
consciousness, more freedom.
So therefore, taking
our time on the spiral,
we're facing the
biggest breakdown
that humans have ever faced.
It's so dangerous that
if we don't respond well,
we can go extinct, and
nature will not preserve us.
However, if enough
of us are up here
seeing what's breaking
through in every field,
in every endeavor,
and mainly seeing
what's breaking through in our
hearts, in our heart's desire--
and I'll talk a lot about that
vocational arousal, enjoining
genius.
And nature invented sexuality.
She's inventing suprasex now.
How did nature get us to
reproduce the species up
to maximum?
She really had to
make it feel good.
[LAUGHS]
I will discuss this
in a little while,
nature is making it feel
good to find your own genius,
enjoin genius, and say
yes to your creativity.
You will feel good
when you say that.
Once I realized from
Teilhard de Chardin
and from the discovery
of the Big Bang
and the direction of evolution
that the direction of evolution
is to love more, create
more, be more, and do more.
So as this depressed
little girl that I
was, young woman
with my five children
and the house, the dogs,
the cats, the husband,
and everything that I
should totally love,
that depression
made me feel guilty.
How dare I be depressed?
I was a fortunate person
I wasn't starving.
I wasn't living in
a war-torn area.
Why should I--
I felt guilty.
But then I understood
when I was able to say yes
to my deeper consciousness,
freedom, and order,
the reason I could say
yes is I discovered
the nature of evolution.
I discovered I am evolution.
You are evolution.
And I am evolution,
become conscious of myself
as evolution.
Now, the awesome
truth to that is I
and you become aware of
yourself as evolution,
that evolution has the wisdom
and genius and brilliance
of the 13.7 billion years
of effort is in you.
And I don't think
any of us have fully
manifested the quality of the
extent of the genius encoded
in us.
That calls us into
action to become a,
I would say, a communication
vehicle of conscious evolution.
So my greatest purpose now is
to create a site of co-creation
and internet possibility,
where everybody--
and we'll talk
about that later--
who has that feeling
of conscious evolution
inside themselves,
I would like to have
them identify themselves
and place themselves
on that wheel of co-creation.
Are you in health?
Are you in education?
Are you in politics?
Place yourself there,
and you'll meet others.
And you know what happens
to you when you meet others?
You'll find, like Jonas
Salk called me a mutant,
I never got--
I was better ever
since he said that.
So I would like to be,
like Jonas was to me,
if you are in any
way a mutant now,
there's going to be an internet
channel for you to just check
in, say what you want to create,
say what you need to create it.
And you know what?
Everywhere on Earth, there's
somebody who's looking for you.
What we need to do right now
is connect the evolutionaries
and then discover the
direction of evolution
through those who seem to
have been able to say yes
in their own hearts.
What will be birthed
out of bringing together
our new powers of love
within the new capacities
of humanities is a
new species, and I'm
calling it Homo universalis.
I believe we're
becoming a new species.
And there's no reason to assume
that Homo sapien sapiens is
the very last that
nature could do
and it's going to say stop here.
There's no way that
nature could stop.
Well, nature isn't stopping
with Homo sapien sapiens.
The very brilliant
people in, let's say,
Singularity University and
other types of growing edge
capabilities are giving
us the capacities
we used to call
gods, I would like
to call it an impulse
of evolutionary love,
that evolutionary
love is what brings
particles to particles all the
way up and all the way down.
So evolution is
a huge love story
that is painful and difficult
and dangerous but great.
It is my assumption that we
have been given high-tech genius
because we're supposed to infuse
it with evolutionary love,
and that ultimately,
the humans are
meant to become what
we used to call gods.
That is to say we can
restore the Earth.
We can heal and free people
from hunger, disease, and more.
We should be doing that.
We can start exploring
the further reaches
of our own inner mind.
And we're in a universe of
billions of galaxies, folks.
So I would like to see us
develop our space programs.
I'd like us to be--
I'm a member of something called
the Galactic University to be
ready for contact if there is.
In other words, to take
that wheel of co-creation,
find out what's working
here on this Earth,
connect it and heal the
Earth, number one, and free
the people who are
hungry, diseased,
and in war, number two.
And number three,
start finding out
who you can be as a
co-creative human.
And then let's
look at the growing
edge in that wheel in
health, education, economics.
And let's draw a very wonderful
circle around the growing edge,
and then let's bring the
growing edge of people together
to have a planetary
awakening in love that
will change the world.
[MUSIC PLAYING]